Progress Report - March 2023 (#348)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-mar-2023/index.md

+++

> date = "2023-04-05T12:00:00-03:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date = "2023-04-10T12:00:00-03:00"
```

title = "Progress Report March 2023"
author = "GoldenX86"

> forum = 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
forum = 756599
```

{{< imgs
	"./applet.png| You shall pass!"
  >}}

german77 solved this {{< gh-hovercard "9997" "behaviour," >}} and while at it also solved a bug where the player count wasn’t correct. 

german77 implemented the… hold on, let me catch my breath first, `SetNpadJoyAssignmentModeSingleWithDestination` service call.
He {{< gh-hovercard "9999" "implemented" >}} it hoping to make `Let’s Get Fit` playable, but unfortunately there are more issues in the way.

Changing topics to Amiibo support, a lot has happened this month.

First of all, german77 managed to {{< gh-hovercard "9953" "write" >}} the correct [CRC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_redundancy_check), making Amiibo data written by yuzu compatible with the Switch; no more invalid info.

Next, if you tried to connect a controller while scanning an Amiibo, it would not be recognized. By {{< gh-hovercard "9981" "accounting" >}} for this and initializing or finalizing the controller, he fixed the issue.

And last but not least, to wrap up the Amiibo saga, Herman the German Sherman {{< gh-hovercard "9995" "added support" >}} for plain Amiibo files.

> Some Amiibos, like the ones themed after `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`, don’t encrypt their data, so they don’t need keys to be dumped. 
> Now yuzu can read non-encrypted game data from your Amiibos correctly!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Amiibos, like the ones themed after `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`, can be edited without the need of keys. Now yuzu can read non-encrypted game data from your Amiibos correctly!
```

Maide is working on more improvements for the Xenoblade series, such as fixing the cloud flickering in `Xenoblade Chronicles 2`, the particle effects in `Xenoblade Chronicles 3`, and the texture flickering that affects the whole saga and some other games.
However, these fixes come at a performance cost, so he needs some help from another GPU developer to optimize them.
Maybe [Blinkhawk](https://github.com/FernandoS27) could lend a hand?

Nintendo contributed in releasing the holy grail of Vulkan extensions, [VK_EXT_shader_object](https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VK_EXT_shader_object.html).
This extension promises to cut down the amount of work needed to build shaders significantly, as its dependencies suggest, requiring support for all previous dynamic state extensions.

Most likely Nintendo intends to use it for their internal emulators, maybe for "backwards compatibility."
Regardless of any of that, we have a lot of work ahead of us to add support for this extension.

But enough about that. Let’s talk about some exciting projects in the works.
{{< imgs
	"./gaia.jpg| Flute intensifies"
  >}}

Regarding Project Gaia:

> Project Gaia is still in development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is still in development.
```

By implementing these {{< gh-hovercard "9889" "new functions," >}} [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) reduced the time the CPU spends in a spinlock, resulting in reduced CPU usage for timing-heavy games like Kirby Forgor 💀… `Kirby and the Forgotten Land`, and `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`.
The new free resources mean better performance for low core count CPUs like quad cores, and for systems with limited power budgets like laptops and handhelds.
With this change, we measured up to a 24% reduction in CPU use or power consumption, depending on the limiting factor.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Left: old 1ms precision; Right: current 0.5ms precision. The result comes from your writer’s laptop which runs a Single Language Windows installation, so don’t mind the Spanish. Note that there is a difference in CPU use between the two results"
    "./usebug.png"
    "./usefix.png"
    >}}

If you can perform more tasks in the same power envelope, you can improve performance without sacrificing battery life.
Alternatively, a more common scenario for an emulator, if your ceiling is a fixed framerate, you can reduce temperatures.

{{< single-title-imgs

>     "This is why the lap in laptop is a lie, mind the package temperature (Xenoblade Chronicles 3)"

Author: This breaks the image tag.

This change caused some regressions, as some games are *very sensitive* to audio scheduling requirements. 
Users reported popping sounds after the merge, so bylaws improved the situation by adding a constant 15 ms of {{< gh-hovercard "10027" "latency" >}} to the sample count reporting.

## Other code changes

Fire Emblem fans have been experiencing freezes in game, and after some investigation, Morph found out that the culprit was the bounded threadsafe queue, introduced with a pull request from [behunin](https://github.com/behunin).

The queue’s job is to pass events from an event producer (like the CPU cores) to an event consumer (like the GPU thread).
The previous implementation which behunin replaced kept allocating and freeing memory, causing periodic latency spikes.

The way to solve this issue is to turn the queue into a {{< gh-hovercard "9778" "bounded queue," >}} meaning no memory allocation is needed as there is a fixed amount of resources available.
And that’s what behunin did, but the new queue implementation seemed to be buggy. 

> Morph added a {{< gh-hovercard "9971" "simplified implementation," >}}, fixing the new gameplay freezes affecting `Fire Emblem: Three Houses` and `Fire Emblem Engage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Morph added a {{< gh-hovercard "9971" "simplified implementation," >}} fixing the new gameplay freezes affecting `Fire Emblem: Three Houses` and `Fire Emblem Engage`.
```

> [Your writer](https://github.com/goldenx86) re-enabled LTO for GCC builds, following the changes made for Windows last time, but only applying the {{< gh-hovercard " optimizations" >}} to the core and video_core subprojects, giving Linux users a nice free performance boost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Your writer](https://github.com/goldenx86) re-enabled LTO for GCC builds, following the changes made for Windows last time, but only applying the {{< gh-hovercard "10014" "optimizations to the core and video_core subprojects," >}} providing Linux users a nice, free performance boost.
```

## Hardware section

### AMD 23.3.2 and newer drivers

> One bad and two good news.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One bad and two good pieces of news.
```

On the positive side, AMD has finally added support for the missing dynamic state extensions in their latest Windows driver release, which improves the shader build times and reduces the stuttering on Radeon GPUs, making them perform on par with NVIDIA.

However, on the negative side, this driver update also introduces a serious regression:

{{< imgs
	"./amd.png| This can affect your entire desktop (Metroid Prime Remastered)"
  >}}

> Some games, such as `Metroid Prime Remastered` and `Pokémon Legends: Arceus` trigger what seems to be an out-of-bounds crash that causes desktop corruption and a driver crash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some games, such as `Metroid Prime Remastered` and `Pokémon Legends: Arceus`, trigger what seems to be an out-of-bounds crash that causes desktop corruption and a driver crash.
```

We advise users to stay on driver version 23.3.1 or older for now. Some older Radeon cards may also benefit from using 23.2.2.

We reported this issue to AMD and they promptly confirmed it, reproduced it, and informed us that they are working on a fix.

Now *that’s* how you do customer support.

Speaking of which…

### Doing Intel’s job

> While testing a crucial rendering fix for `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` that we will discuss next month, Morph did some feature testing to investigate what makes Intel Windows drivers run like the Challenger project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While testing a crucial rendering fix for `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` that we will discuss next month, Morph did some feature testing to investigate what makes Intel Windows drivers run so horribly.
```
Removed reference to shuttle explosion that involves death

The devs are on fire and they’re not stopping anytime soon.

Maide is working on more improvements for the Xenoblade series, such as fixing the cloud flickering in `Xenoblade Chronicles 2`, the particle effects in `Xenoblade Chronicles 3`, and the texture flickering that affects the whole saga and some other games.
However, these fixes come at a performance cost, so he needs some help from another GPU developer to optimize them.
Maybe [Blinkhawk](https://github.com/FernandoS27) could lend a hand?

Nintendo contributed in releasing the holy grail of Vulkan extensions, [VK_EXT_shader_object](https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VK_EXT_shader_object.html).
This extension promises to cut down the amount of work needed to build shaders significantly, as its dependencies suggest, requiring support for all previous dynamic state extensions.

Most likely Nintendo intends to use it for their internal emulators, maybe for "backwards compatibility."
Regardless of any of that, we have a lot of work ahead of us to add support for this extension.

But enough about that. Let’s talk about some exciting projects in the works.

> Regarding Project Gaia:
> 
> {{< imgs
> 	"./gaia.jpg| Flute intensifies"
>   >}}
> 
> Project Gaia is still in development.
> 
> Oh and Project Lime is in release candidate status, under intense internal testing.
> 
> That’s all folks! Thank you for sticking until the end.
> 
> Thanks to Bing Chat for the terrible jokes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< imgs
	"./gaia.jpg| Flute intensifies"
  >}}

Regarding Project Gaia:
Project Gaia is still in development.

Oh, and Project Lime is in release candidate status, under intense internal testing.

That’s all folks! Thank you for sticking around until the end of this progress report.

Thanks to Bing Chat for the terrible jokes.
```
